# The Unicorn Project

## A Novel about Developers, Digital Disruption, and Thriving in the Age of Data

#### by Gene Kim

## Part One: September 3 - September 18

### Chapter 1 - Wednesday, September 3

#### Summary

Maxine, a strong IT professional, comes back from family vacation to find that a major failure with the payroll software has resulted in multiple people being canned and herself being reassigned. Her boss Chris reassures her that she will be back in 4 months if she keeps her head down and doesn't make any waves while she's on her new assignemnt, The Phoenix Project. Maxine feels exiled to a project that is overbudget, behind schedule, and by all accounts ready to be scrapped.

After gathering her things and reporting to her new building she finds that the new buidling she's working in is drab and the floors are endless cubicle mazes that seem lifeless and impersonal. Meeting her new boss, Randy, and one of her new teammates, Josh, are the 2 bright spots in moving to this new project as they both seem sincere and engaged in what's going on, even though their conversations are already giving her an idea of what a mess the project is.

She gets her standard developer setup and upon logging into her new laptop finds that she has access to some HR tools and the Office Suite. All necessary tools but not what a developer needs to be productive. After hours of searching she can't find the source code repo, documentation for how any of their projects build, or access any of the crucial servers for her to be capable of doing any part of her job. Instead of having a good start on a documentation buildout plan she has a mile long list of todos consisting of getting access to the right servers, platforms, and repos.

#### Takeaways

- The book didn't really dive into how the blame was placed on Maxine but it definitely gives the impression that it was unjust. Chris may have saved Maxine from the axe but by placing blame for the failure on her, because she was conveniently on vacation, was bing a terrible leader. It is important to stand up for your people, especially when they're being unjustly maligned and don't deserve it.
- Top performers like Maxine are difficult to come by. She went from thinking she worked for a great company to updating her resume because her boss hung her out to dry. Don't underestimate the impact your actions as a leader have on the people on your team.
- Documentation is important! Maxine burned hours of her day just compiling a list of questions because her machine was not setup correctly and there was nowhere for her to get answers. Providing knowledge bases with a repeatable path to success for anything reduces ramp up time and provides new teammates with a consistent experience and confidence in their new team.
- When people are afraid to share problems it's often indicative of a bad corporate culture. Simple mistakes being punished instead of getting used as learning opportunities only encourages behavior that hides missteps and prevents people from innovating because of that fear.

### Chapter 2 - Friday, September 5th

#### Summary

After a couple of days compiling to-do lists and getting fewer answers than new questions, Maxine has made very little progress in her quest to have a buildable version of the Phoenix project on her machine. She only has one of many repos download, is still missing credentials for valuable share drives that are somehow being managed on separate Active Directories by separate managers, can’t find the config files she needs, and is still wading through copious amounts of documentation that often yield very little in the way of helpful direction. On top of all of these frustrations, as she’s getting ready to leave on Friday, Randy catches her and asks her to fill out her timesheets for budgetary reasons. She’s given an opaque project code to log everything against and does her best to cobble some notes together about how she’s been spending her time the last few days in a way that feels less than honest at Randy’s direction.

The following Monday marks the big company wide town hall update that gives all employees at the organization a bit of visibility from the C-suite about what’s going on in the company, how revenue projections are going, what the stock is doing and how they’re responding to it, and any leadership changes that are happening along with how they will affect the organization. This time she learns that the current CEO, Steve Masters, is being supplanted as the Chairman of the board and being replaced by the former CEO Bob Strauss, although Steve will maintain the CEO role. Bob goes on to explain that the company is in a time of war, and splitting the roles of Chairman and CEO are necessary in times like these to ensure the company is responding appropriately to fierce competition and shrinking market share. Later on in the presentation the SVP of retail operations, announces that the Phoenix project will be launching later this month which is met with concerned murmurs across the auditorium.

At the end of the town hall there is a small time for Q&A which allows employees to get answers for specifics they might not have received during the updates from leadership. Most of it is background noise for Maxine until she hears someone ask about the embarrassing payroll glitch that was laid at her feet and the reason she was moved to the Phoenix Project. This jolts her wandering mind back to reality to relive the frustration of being unceremoniously migrated to this stagnant corporate prison to serve her time for a mistake that wasn’t hers.

#### Takeaways

- Is there value in a daily work diary? Maxine keeps a daily diary of the projects she’s worked on, including how time might have been wasted, triumphs she’s had in problem solving, and lessons learned from barking up the wrong tree from time to time. Having a personal repository to reference like this could be useful?
- Engineers like solving problems, it’s fun, that’s why we do it. Give engineers the right problems to solve by removing the ones that are not fun or necessary from their to-do list of problems to solve.
- As a leader, we must learn to be consistent with our messaging. Sarah Moulton, the SVP of retail operations, changed her messaging at town halls regularly without explanation. Her erratic positions in her presentations lead to a lot of confusion and eventually ridicule because no one could take her seriously.
- Remember who your “customers” are. When we think of a customer in the abstract instead of real people we often do not achieve the desired outcome.
- Sarah Moulton announces the launch of the Phoenix Project at the end of the month. Based on the response it sounds like that’s not a date based in reality. As a leader we need to make sure we have a realistic picture of the work that needs to be done and make sure we don’t commit our teams to deadlines that are not driven by facts.

### Chapter 3 - Monday, September 8th

#### Summary

The town hall now over, Maxine returns to her desk and a reminder of the stakeholder meeting starting in 15 minutes greets her. Some of the fruit of asking to be added to any meetings that might be useful to her. The meeting is filled with people asking question about what they heard in the town hall, complaining about not getting things they need, and how they can't do their jobs until they get this missing whatevers. After hearing that there are new people starting soon that should be useful in a couple of weeks Maxine says "good luck, chumps", in an apparently audible way. The room all hones in on her with expectation of her elaborating on her comments. She gathers herself and tries to put it in more diplomatic terms and explains this list of road blocks she's run into and qualifies it by stating that this is stuff she's really strong with, so how would a junior dev be able to be useful quickly?

Her old boss, Chris, is in the meeting as well and makes enough faces and gestures at her that she decides it's best for her to bail out of the meeting before she does something else to draw attention to herself. As she leaves she's greeted by a friendly face that introduces himself as Kurt and offers to help get her a bunch of what she needs. Maxine welcomes the offer for help since she's been spinning her wheels since day 1 with little to no traction. As they wrap up their conversation they commiserate about how badly run the project is and how inefficient the systems they're working in are and the impact it has on the developer experience and the quality of the code they can produce.

She decides today is the day she's going to build SOMETHING, one thing... anything. Hours of fruitless effort lead her to remembering the trouble she went through to get her first DSL internet connection setup and the amount of time and effort she had to put into solving that problem. Solving problems is something she loves to do and isn't going to let this project beat her. Her email brings her a new message that her ticket status has changed but inspecting further reveals that the ticket was closed because she needs a manager's approval to get a dev environment setup. With her new resolve she spends the next couple of days navigating multiple ticket systems, corporate buildings, and overbearing beaurocracy to get everything she needs to move her ticket forward only for it to be closed again because they were out of storage space and would not be getting more for 5 months.

Frustrated and not sure what to do next she leaves work and ends up at a school coding program for girls that she volunteers at. There are a couple of students there that she already knows working on a problem. She's able to help them solve the issues with their code, teach them about some easy developer pitfalls that can easily be avoided if you know what to look for, and showed them how fun solving problems by writing software can be (as well as reminding herself). Later that night she gets a text message from a collaborator about a PR for a new feature and she's reminded of the personal project she started that's now open source and being used by a number of people across the globe to manage their own personal tasks. This brings back another poignant memory of her love for coding and how she spent countless hours rearchitecting her whole solution and modifying the code for outstanding PRs to work with the new architecture to make it easier for developers to integrate with her project and add features.

#### Takeaways

- The confusion and chaos in the stakeholder status update is another reminder to be clear and consistent with communication and don't commit to dates that have not been vetted. The team is scrambling because they're not sure if it's a false alarm or not, others are saying that dates are still being negotiated. Inconsistent messaging from leadership and committing people to timelines they have not agreed to are bad leadership communications.
- Environments that are difficult to setup, work in, and build are the best way to slow your developers down. Strive to make these things easy.
- Process is good and can provide necessary guard rails. Overbearing beaurocracy to do anything can be crippling and unnecessarily confusing. Find the balance between these 2 extremes so people can get what they need without too much hassle.
- Don't forget that every ticket you submit goes to another person. With all of the ticketing systems that Maxine has to wade through to get answers her frustration builds without a humanizing element. Seeing the people that she was relying on brought that into perspective. Also, build relationships before you need to lean on them.
- Coding can and should be fun! If it's not then why not? What key components are missing from the developer experience that takes away the fun of problem solving?

### Chapture 4 - Thursday, September 11

#### Summary

Chapter 4 opens with the chaos of everyone trying to scramble to meet a production release date of tomorrow at 5:00 PM, apparently the SVP of retail operations wasn't bluffing with her release timeline. William, the QA director, is in charge of the release team and Maxine offers to help as he prepares for a meeting between development and ops, who was as blindsided as they were about the release. The war room between ops and dev starts off pretty rough, the devs don't know how many servers they actually need. A "handful" of Linux and Windows servers and one Kumquat box which is met with great ire from the ops team. Maxine finally helps crystalize the need by asking how many requests per second they are expecting and how many the system can currently handle which reveals a chasm of a negative discrepancy.

As the realization sets in that they may be attempting an impossible task Sarah, the SVP of retail operations, chimes in and reminds everyone that it must be done. There is no option for failure. After trying to inspire with her words she's met with a laugh from Maxine who reminds her that they're still trying to figure out how to deploy it. Sarah makes some threatening comments about not having the "right people on the bus", a phrase from the famous "Good To Great" book, before leaving. On her way out she invites Maxine to join her for lunch.

The meeting continues and as more conversations take place Maxine begins to realize just how many tech stacks are involved in making this platform work and that she had only uncovered a portion of them in her days of investigation and opening tickets. Just as they're realizing they need help from the firewall team, which will take weeks, John, the Chief Information Security Officer, slams the door open to make a principled stance to stop the release. He is absolutely willing to die on this hill, and insists everyone else do it with him before storming off to pursue his mission.

After leaving an endless series of release meetings Maxine heads back to her desk. When she returns Kurt is there with a 3 ring binder containing everything she should need for a Phoenix build. Kurt informs her that there's more to the story than he realized, it sounds like there's some groups that feel threatened by her ability to decode the build process and he invites her to a happy hour so he can fill her in and introduce her to some people that appreciate all of the leg work she put in to help them put this documentation together. She immediately gets to work and successfully starts a build process that runs for nearly 3 hours before bombing out on a missing credentials file. Kurt sends her some contact info to run that down which she promptly does, she's near the finish line.

### Takeaways

- Know what your ask is before you have to ask for it. When the dev team couldn't easily clarify what they needed to run their software it undermined trust in their abilities and wasted ops time.
- Sarah, realizing she's railroading the entire IT department with the release timeline, resorts to thinly veiled threats when she's pushed back on by the teams actually doing the work. Don't be a deaf leader.
- Similarly, the chaos of trying to assemble a release team, build process, firewall needs, and all of the other layers of this technical onion revealed out out of touch leadership was with the state of this project. It's almost always unacceptable to set a date on behalf of someone else.
- Kurt alluded to a group of people that might be trying to subvert the build process documentation Maxine was so desperately looking for because they felt threatened. Hoarding information in the pursuit of job security is a dead end.
- The endless pursuit of information is what led Maxine to connecting the dots for this other group that was able to create the extensive documentation she needed to do a full Phoenix build. Always be hungry for information, the devil is in the details.

### Chapter 5 - Thursday, September 11

#### Summary

Maxine goes to Dockside to meet Kurt and the group of people he said wanted to meet her and thank her for all of her work. Everyone that Maxine has talked to about Kurt has spoken very highly of him with one exceptino that referred to him as "not the sharpest knife in the drawer" which was curious. When she arives she's introduced to his crew which affectionately refers to themselves as "the rebellion" and they all have Star Wars Alliance stickers on their laptops as a sign of solidarity with one another. Their goal is to help people and get meaningful things done, despite the frustrating and overbearing beaurocracy that makes it difficult to do their job. Kurt has somehow cobbled together this group of talented engineers that are great at getting things done and working around the edges of the system.

After introductions they start giving updates on various threads they're unraveling. Trying to get software for testing automation, resources for the ops team to stand up servers, etc. The release team is only formed today, and the release date is tomorrow, and they don't even have a buildable project let alone the hardware to run it on. Kurt asks Maxine to elaborate on her experience trying to get a working Phoenix build. Maxine spends 20 minutes telling the tale of every road block and hurdle she's had to deal with over the past week and how she's documented and attacked getting resolutions for each of them. Her perseverance and ability are impressive to the table and they thank her for everything she's done to get this far. They offer to help her create a dummy certificate to satisfy the latest build error she ran into, not production worthy but it would be good enough for a dev environment. Maxine is kicking herself for not bringing her laptop with her to this meetup like everyone else did because she would have been able to show them and work on it right now if she had.

As their meeting wraps up they decide to add one more item to their usual 2 item agenda of talking about new tech and possible recruits. That new agenda item is talking about progress on the Phoenix build. After that, Kurt announces that he's starting a betting pool on how long it will take them to have a running build in production of the Phoenix project. Almost everyone seems to fall somewhere between 11:00 PM and 9:00 AM with Maxine picking the 6:00 AM slot because, the POS has to be up by 8:00 AM right? The most experienced engineer at the table, Dwayne, puts his money on Sunday evening. He says no one really understands how incredibly unprepared they are for this release.

#### Takeaways

- Again, beaurocracy sucks if there's too much of it. Checks and balances are good and healthy guard rails that can create consistency and predictability. Mazes of onerous box checking and permission gathering slow productivity to a crawl and prevent people from focusing on the things that they're really good at.
- Having a network of people that you can rely on to help you solve engineering problems is always a good thing to have. Who are my group of rebels that I could rely on to help me get things done?
- How big your budget is doesn't matter, what you do with it matters. One of the higher-ups named William talked about accomplishment in terms of how big your budget is. This thinking prevented him from seeing the value of testing automation because that might end up making testing cost less which is bad if you only measure success by the size of your budget which is small minded thinking.
- Don't be afraid to acknowledge people for why they're awesome. Kurt is incredibly complimentary of the people working around him and is accutely aware of the skills that make them great. He's not shy about articulating that when introducing them to Maxine. Give people the props they deserve!

### Chapter 6 - Friday, September 12

#### Summary

It's Friday which means the limited release preparation window is in full swing and nearly over already. Day quickly turns to night and the release efforts are in full swing. Things obviously are off to a terrible start when pessimistic Dwayne admits that the release is going even worse than he expected. Brent is being pulled in every which direction to fix anything and everything while some other people are sitting and waiting to perform one 5 minute task with nothing else to do but watch. Immediately performance issues abound, bad data appears in the pricing system from an errant CSV file, database migrations are taking exponentially longer than anticipated, and everything seems to be going about as poorly as possible. The system is not back online by their retail open target which forces all of the retail locations to figure out how to use carbon paper for orders.

As the mess wears on for multiple days the team starts dropping like flies to illness. The combination of long hours with little sleep and close quarters for the release team has spread disease quickly amongst those responsible for the release leaving very few healthy members to continue working through issues. When Sarah berates Wes for an unnacceptable rollout he confronts her with the harsh reality of the situation leadership has created. In addition to the disastrous release and hampering sickness they have to worry about losing engineers due to the unpleasant work environment and unreasonable expectations. There have been 4 resignations betweeen Chris and Wes' team with another 3 talking about it and assumedly more quietly looking for a way out the door already.

By the time Thursday rolls around for the meeting at the Dockside bar with the rebellion things have stabilized enough. Unfortunately, they also get notice of the first couple of heads to roll in the fallout with the Front End Dev Manager and QA Directer being named in email. Everyone laments the loss of these 2 leaders with the expecation that more are coming. Kurt enters the bar meeting late with Kirsten from Project Management in tow. She commands a lot of respect in the organization and has been around to see the whiplash of moving from insourcing to outsourcing and back again. She tells a story about how expensive data warehouse schema changes became with too many external sources coordinating design changes. Dwayne is also able to tell a tale of combining 3 distinct network switches at their plants into one, which sounds like a good idea without context. However, each of those switches served a specific purpose and was managed by different external groups. The end result was more expensive and consumed more time because these 3 external entities were now expected to work in the same space so coordination and collaboration were much more costly. The Rebellion comes to realize that this is almost exactly how The Phoenix Project became the mess that it is today.

### Takeaways

- Production software releases should never be as stressful as they are in this chapter. We need to create automated, repeatable processes that are stable and easy to execute.
- Wes calls out how many people have quit, are planning to quit, and his suspicions that others are looking as a result of this fiasco. People don't like working in bad environments. As leaders we should create an environment that is positive and encouraging to work in. Don't create fires, put them out, or better yet prevent them from happening in the first place.
- Autonomy matters. The more you have to understand every system's detail and how they interact with the thing you're working on the less likely you are to be able to make changes without breaking things. Give teams the ability to focus on what they're responsible for in a way that's flexible, resilient, and efficient.
- Be curious about things that don't make sense at surface level and understand why something is the way it is before changing it if you can. The combining of the 3 switches as plants created a lot more problems than it solved. AT the surface it made sense, less hardware, more efficient, cheaper cost. However, the increased external management costs increased enough to negate any cost savings.

### Chapter 7 - Thursday, September 18th

#### Summary

A familiar voice behind Maxine turns out to be the bartender, Dr. Erik Reid. Kirsten says that Steve and Dick have been trying to recruit him to serve on the board of directors for a long time. He was part of the driving force behind the rollout of the original MRP system that Maxine had worked on maintaining for so long. Apparently Erik has heard of Maxine and is an admirer of her work and gives her a lot of props. They talk about the importance of decoupling code bases so teams can operate independently.

Erik spends a bit of time talking to the table and talks about how creating proper separation in code follows the First Ideal of Locality and Simplicity. He then says they should look at the engagement scores before returning back to his bartending duties. Kirsten admits that the IT engagement scores are in the toilet but the rest of the organization is very high. Erik's last comment about the

#### Takeaways

// TODO: Finish takeaways for this chapter

### Chapter 8 - Tuesday, September 23rd

#### Summary

Kurt gets the dev manager job and brings Maxine and Cranky Dave along with him to the Data Hub team. The team is skeptical of Kurt and justifiably outraged at the fact that their team was blamed for The Phoenix project's deployment disaster. They are however, happy to see 2 new senior developers join the team since they've been compalining about not having enough head count for the workload.

Meanwhile, there's a feature freeze agreed to by the executives so the various IT teams can address all of the issues plaguing the systems. Maxine starts on the team by pairing with another senior dev named Tom. She helps him solve a race condition issue on her first day joining the team but is met with the cold hard reality that her code won't see production for a while because they don't have the ability to test and push code themselves.

The next day as Maxine and Tom are whiteboarding a large extended warranty feature design they receive notice that customer logins are broken. Tom insists that it's probably not actually them but likely a networking change but they ahve to submit a ticket to get production logs from ops because they can't directly get that information to verify it. After hours waiting for the logs, reviewing the logs, and sharing their findings it's finally addressed. Another person is fired for the mistake as each misstep is now excruciatingly visible.

After resolving the production outing and disconnecting from work late The Rebellion meets at Dockside again with their newest teammates from the Data Hub team. They spend the evening talking about how to make the developer experience better, what technical debt it makes the most sense to focus on, and how to share what they're accomplishing with other teams to help their efforts as well.

> A bad system will beat a good person every time.
>
> - Sensei W. Edwards Deming

#### Takeaways

- When something goes wrong ask "what caused the problem" not "who caused the problem".
- Psychological safety is paramount in creating an environment that allows innovation and creativity. If everyone's too afraid to make a mistake then no one will try anything new.
  // TODO: Finish takeaways for this chapter

### Chapter 9 - Monday, September 29

#### Summary

Maxine arrives at work on Monday with five boxes of donuts to celebrate testing day with the QA team. She's excited to finally see the work she's done on the Data Hub team get tested and see what kind of feedback she gets. When she finds Tom and explains why she's excited and what the donuts are for Tom is surpised and tells her that some of QA is outsourced and some of it is on-site, although he doesn't know where they are located. Furthermore, they will take weeks to test, the results will be logged in another system and exported, then development will have to take those results and manually key them into their ticketing system to take care of anything QA sends back. In disbelief Maxine and Tom go to find Kurt to see if they can locate the QA team and share donuts with them. Kurt tells them that Roy is the manager but is tied up for a bit so he gives Charlotte, who is supposedly like a mother hen to the QA team, a heads up that they're coming over.

When Maxine and Tom arrive at the QA building they realize their key cards don't let them into that building. Thankfully Charlotte meets them at the door and is not only excited to see them and grateful for the gesture, but she's already ordered pizzas for lunch and written a thank you message for the QA team. Maxine updates the wording to emphasize that QA are team members since QA seems to be treated as second class citizens, and signs the names of the Data Hub team to the message. Her and Kurt then spend the rest of the morning and lunch time meeting the QA team, asking them about what they're working on, and telling them how much they appreciate their work. After pizza Maxine is able to get a glimpse at the QA workflow only to find that the QA team is not actually able to test yet because they are waiting on development to finish merges, environments to be reset, and the data warehouse team to provide new test data.

Hearing some yelling coming from the conference room with the pizza in it she realizes that the QA manager Roy has showed up and does not appear to be happy at the gesture. He's ranting about how Kurt is up to something and is upset that Charlotte allowed them into the QA building without coordinating it through him. Kurt shows up in the middle of Roy's rant with Kirsten in tow and Roy's attention is immediately on them ready to confront. Kurt offers a thank you and gives Kirsten the floor to address the room. She states how grateful she is for the role that the QA team plays and emphasizes that the feature freeze is meant to improve the quality on the tools their users need most and to provide more platform stability and that they are a vital part of that chain. Her speech is passionate and well received and the room excitedly applauds her. Upon the conclusion of her speech and departure Roy tells Kurt that he's on to him and won't let him get away with whatever he's trying to pull before stomping out. Maxine and Tom connect with Kurt and leave to make sure they are able to meet the 5:00 PM deadline of having all of the code merged and over to the QA team.

#### Takeaways

- Don't duplicate data entry! Disconnected systems that require manual export, re-keying data in, managing multiple statuses across systems, etc. are all wastes of time. Try to do it once and make sure that everyone that needs it has access to it.
- Teams should be able to operate pretty independently, give as much local authority to teams as possible so they are able to build, test, and deploy with as little friction as possible.
- Look for opportunities to appreciate the people that you collaborate with. Teams that feel forgotten, overlooked, taken for granted, or marginalized will never be able to be the fully engaged partners they can be if they don't feel like their work matters to anyone.
- Feedback loops are important. The shorter the time between doing a thing and getting feedback on that thing, the more impactful it is and the faster you will be able to improve, refine, and perfect.

### Chapter 10 - Monday, September 29

#### Summary

Kurt and Maxine return to building 5 to join the merging war room that everyone else is busily working on merging all of their code together to create their release build. They only do this once a month so it's not uncommon for their to be significant conflicts across the entire code base. This is on full display as people try to reconcile some conflicts that are thousands of lines of code and even talk about printing out code snippets so they can review the changes side-by-side on paper together. Maxine finds out that Purna is the integration manager responsible for making sure that all of the changes get merged in successfully for all of the tickets that have been worked. There are 392 tickets that need to be merged into the code base for the release and verified by the QA team once the build is complete. Since the Data Hub team that Maxine is now on is not heavily integrated with anything else in the Phoenix project they are able to merge their changes without conflicts pretty quickly.

After witnessing the chaos of the merge process for a while Maxine is pulled from a pizza filled break room into another conference room with The Rebellion in it. Shannon has come up with the idea to decoupled from the Phoenix project merge and build process so they can get their changes tested while the rest of the dev teams are working on reconciling the rest of the merge conflicts. The Rebellion is excited about this and Maxine finds another boost of energy to work on this new project and they determine that in order for this to work they won't be able to use the existing, and scarcely available test environments. So Maxine sets off with the help of Brent and Adam to create a trimmed down environment with the express purpose of testing the Data Hub platform.

The next day while Maxine is hard at work on the more custom tailored environment for Data Hub there's a commotion about a production issue that's causing a big problem and needs hotfixed. All of the dev managers get with their teams to try to track down and isolate where the issue is. The dev manager for the middleware team announces that she thinks it's part of their code and is soon able to identify the specific issue which turns out to be a one line fix. The problem is that the code cannot be promoted to production since it's a level P3 ticket and not a P1 ticket so they need someone named Jared to promote the change. When they can't find him the whole process comes to a halt. Maxine loses it finally and goes on a rant about how silly it is that they can be trusted to fix the code but not to promote the fix to production. When she learns that Jared is not some aged veteran code guru, but rather a young engineer that's relatively fresh out of college she's even more frustrated.

Eventually, they approvals are given, Jared does his thing and gets the code into the hotfix release but is not able to deploy the code. Things are then kicked over to the operations team which is then tasked with a similar set of hurdles and red tape to satisfy before they can push it to production. Finally, late into the night everything is approved and deployed and everyone is able to go home. All of these people were prisoners to this beaurocracy for a one line change of code. As everyone clears out Maxine is left in the conference room alone. She texts The Rebellion to see if anyone is available to meet at Dockside to help her with something and grab a drink.

#### Takeaways

- Merging less frequently creates a lot more merge headaches. When something is painful do not default to doing it less often, most often smaller and more approachable chunks are easier to manager over time versus massive chunks.
- If someone is trustworthy to fix and issue they are trustworthy enough to make sure that issue gets merged, tested and promoted to production.
- If a process is not working well don't just keep following the process because it's the process. Look for ways to improve it to make it more efficient and to better serve the people that use the process to solve problems.

### Chapter 11 - Wednesday, October 1

#### Summary

Maxine gets to to Dockside and Kurt is already waiting with beers and wine on the table. Maxine doesn't like to self medicate with alcohol but decides she needs a little tonight with the day she's had. As everyone arrives they are talking about the progress on their slimmed down environments and the collaboration with the teams around them. Eventually Maxine gets to bring up what's been bothering her and why she asked to assemble a meeting of The Rebellion. She's flabergasted by how difficult it is to get things done. Endless roads of ticket creation and waiting for stamps of approval and review processes and restricted access. Adam and Dwayne share how they did it to themselves because they wanted QA to be separate from DEV. Every single thing that went wrong was an excuse to add more checks and balances to handcuff the devs more until they ended up here, with endlessly unnecessary beaurocracy.

After the meeting at dockside Maxine goes home and starts to feel ill, the sickness from the release finally caught up to her. During her sick days away she's able to keep in touch with Kurt and finds out that the merge is still not done and the Data Hub team is making great progress on their smaller containerized environment. Later in the week she starts trolling through open dev tickets to see if she can find a common thread for a priority ask. She stumbles on multiple seasonal bundle tickets that did not get completed in time to be useful. She then finds a ticket from Maggie, the senior director of products, asking for the ability to create these bundles skus and associated discounts through the UI with one screen which would make all of these bundle tickets obsolete. She sends what she's found off to Kurt for safe keeping and to pull at the thread more.

Once the weekend is over Maxine is feeling better and is back to work on Monday. The team worked all through the weekend to get the Data Hub environments up and running so not only the QA team can use them to test but the dev team can use them to write code against. They celebrate the big win on how much time they can save only to realize the value will not be seen by the business because they still cannot promote these faster code changes into production without the overgrown nanny state of checks and balances in the organization. In order to make a change to that process they need to get approval from the "TEP-LARB" (Technology Evaluation Process - Lead Architecture Review Board) which is notorious for never approving anything. Everyone feels deflated but seems willing to at least make an effort at submitting their proposal through this process. That is until Maxine suggests that they run their entire environment themselves. All of the production servers, deployments, and maintenance would be their team's responsibility. This would allow them to continue to automate their CI/CD pipeline in a way that would deliver that newfound value to the business as well. They decided this is an acceptable plan B should the "TEP-LARB" do what they expect it to do.

Later in the day Maxine and Tom finish resolving another issue and decide to head over to the QA building again to help them test it and see how things are going. When they get over there they find Purna and Cranky Dave testing a feature that's been delayed twice before because of simple config issues that take too long to fix and promote in their old process because they didn't want to delay the other features in the release. This surplus inventory functionality that allows them to send inventory that's not selling in the store back to the warehouse to be sold at a discount on the ecommerce site. They tell her to go check out what Adam and Shannon are doing in the conference room. What they're doing is wrapping up getting the CI pipeline up and running to build and test code as it's checked in. Maxine is ecstatic to see that people are already resolving issues found by tests in a few minutes.

At the ned of the day The Rebellion once again assembles at Dockside and talk about collocating the develops with the QA team again. Everyone is into the idea but facilities says it will take 9 months to get the furniture ordered and have all of the spaces re-organized to meet the requirements of a mocked up layout. The team is noticeably disappointed by this but quickly suggest just taking matters into their own hands. Dwayne offers to use his truck to go to the office supply store and get the things they need to organize their space the way they want. The team is quickly on board with this approach and decides they need soem heavy stuff so facilities isn't tempted to move it all out once it's in place. Now they have a plan to integrate the dev and QA teams so they can work more collaboratively, the team is self-organizing much to Maxines delight.

#### Takeaways

- Grooming backlogs is important. Carrying the psychological weight of unkept promises in the form of tickets that are no longer useful or accurate because too much time has passed can be a difficult thing for a team to bear.
- Having stable, consistent, lightweight environments for development and testing make the developer experience much easier and productive.
- Fast feedback from a CI pipeline tightens the feedback loop and makes it easier to resolve issues quickly by developers before they get seen by QA or even in production.
- Deploying to production early and often shows a tremendous amount of value to business partners, especially when you can take their feedback to new things and implement them quickly. The tighter a ticket lifecycle can be the more trust you can build in that relationship.

### Chapter 12 - Monday, October 13

#### Summary

The 2 previously massive roadblocks that prevented the Data Hub team from deploying software were environments and testing. Those have both been resolved leveraging new tools and building new relationships with their quality teams. The next major roadblock they need to resolve is deployment. There's still so much red tape and inconsistency in the deployment process that even building and testing new features grind to a halt waiting for deployments to happen. They can't deploy frequently enough to run any meaningful promotion tests and learn and adapt from them because it takes at least 6 weeks to do anything.

Maxine's intuition on being able to give marketing a self-service tool to create promotional bundles is a top priority for them. Kurt is able to secure a meeting with Maggie, the senior director of retail program management, to talk about the level of importance for the feature set and talk about how they can get business sponsorship to allow them to remove blockers from being able to build and deploy in a way that allows them to create the product features that the business needs quickly.

Next they meet with Ron, the security manager they met through Shannon, and they pitch him on their idea to split out the deployment of the Data Hub product from the rest of the Phoenix project. They make their case and are denied by Ron because he would need to do a complete audit of the software to ensure regulatory compliance and security and there's already a long queue for that and he cannot let them jump the line without clearance from the boss. Shannon sees an opportunity to potentially use his audit documentation to create an automated process to do this work.

After little success with Ron they have their presentation with the TEP-LARB later that week. Maggie was able to pull some strings to get them on the agenda. Before their presentation is an engineer named Ellen who's lobbying to use Appache Tomcat for their web application server but the TEP-LARB rejects it, despite Ellen's strong arguments for a proven technology that is widely used by many major tech firms. Maxine and Adam present their case for changing the deployment process and architecture for the Data Hub team. The TEP-LARB is once again skeptical and rejects the proposal saying that they don't have the staff to support such a change in infrastructure. Even after Dwayne and the Data Hub team offer to take over managing the environments themselves the proposal is again rejected. The only good to come out of the TEP-LARB meeting was that there's a new addition to the Rebellion with Ellen now joining the cause after hearing their plight in the meeting.

Since the more mainstream channels did not pan out in their favor the last option is to let Data Hub operate as a stand alone group outside of the typical operations and procedures. Chris is not please about this, mostly because he didn't get a heads up, but is eventually strong armed into green lighting the effort because Maggie had pulled Sarah in who also pulled some strings to make this happen so they could deliver on their self-servicing promotion creation strategy. He sends out a memo announcing that the Data Hub team will be reporting directly to him in an experimental capacity and will be exempt from the normal rules and regulations around changes.

As they're building out the new environments and deployment infrastructure another interesting hiccup begins to surface. The time it takes to get a feature from the idea stage to a deployed state spends very little of it's time in the IT sector, only 2.5% to be exact. The rest of the time is spent waiting on product management to go through their process, get approval, get funding, answer questions, and a myriad of other things that aren't writing code. Maggie pulls the product manager and says that he's going to be sitting with the product team now and will answer any questions they have about features so they can act on things faster. He objects with a laundry list of things that he is responsible for that are more important than answering IT questions but Maggie says if he wants to continue to be a product manager she will work on re-assigning those responsibilities and he will move to sit next to the Data Hub team, otherwise he can be moved to a pure product marketing role instead.

#### Takeaways

- Removing blockers from part of a process can still result it net zero gain if there's soemthing else creating a bottleneck. Despite having the environment and testing issues figured out the Data Hub team was still constrained by process.
- Be on the lookout for like minded engineers that you can partner with. The Data Hub team pulled Ellen into the Rebellion because they saw that she was aligned with their vision. Who around me can help me push our vision of IT forward?
- You can almost always find a reason to say no to something. The TEP-LARB seemingly had an endless list of reasons to say no to any proposal in front of them. We should be finding reasons to empower engineers to make decisions, not creating procedures that restrict.
- Building relationships with product managers is very important. They drive the vision of the platform and the success of new feature development. How can we make sure we have consistent and open lines of communication between engineering and product?

### Chapter 13 - Thursday, November 6th

#### Summary

Thusday evening the team is working on deploying "whitespace changes" which should allow them to test their build and deployment pipelines without actually deploying any new code.  The first one fails because of a borked database connection string which is quickly diagnosed and fixed.  After resolving that and some other configuration issues they have a successful deploy start to finish on the next attempt and leave for Dockside to celebrate their accomplishment.

While at Dockside they arejoined by Maggie and Kirsten who are celebrating the successful deployment and the succesful experiment of allowing the Data Hub team to own their own deployments.  As they continue to talk about the challenges facing the company for rapidly testing out promotional packages it becomes clear that in order to be able to iterate fast on promotional packages they're going to need to offer assistance to the Promotions teams as well.  Maggie agrees once again to be the sponsor of this effort and give The Rebellion whatever engineers they need to try to pull off their magic again with these other teams.  Maxine is asked to hand pick her team from The Rebillion to take with her to help the Promotions teams with the work ahead of them.  

The next day the downtime for the Data Hub project is brought up.  Kurt refuses to blame game or put up some kind of sacrificial lamb for the executives to punish and berate.  Instead the team holds a retrospective of the events, going over all of the details of the deployment, how they discovered the issue, and the various steps that each teammember took in troubleshooting and ultimately fixing the issue.  Kurt makes sure to focus on the problem and ways they can improve to prevent it again vs laying the blame at anyone's feet.  He and Maxine are able to foster an environment of psychological safety for the team as they talk through these issues and learn how to improve as a team.  Maxine meticulously documents all of their findings and creates a document with a timeline of events and what they've taken away with a list of 5 things that people will change right away to help prevent future outages.

Maxine and her Rebellion crew meet with the Promotions teams and find that they are largely bottlenecked by needs from back end systems that they have been waiting on for months.  There's also a disconnect between datasets within systems and creating a comprehensive picture of a customer is difficult to do because of all of their fragmented datasets.  Utlimately Maxine and Kurt feel like they can help with getting this team what they need and help them improve their platforms.  After their meeting Maxine debriefs with Maggie and is offered the opportunity to attend an on-site training for the Parts Unlimited store teams and see how the people in the stores use their software firsthand.  Maxine jumps at the opportunity and is signed up for the 2 day training over the weekend.

The weekend is spent with the rest of the Parts Unlimited training staff learning how to help customers, lookup parts, and help diagnose car issues.  Maxine is pained to learn that the salespeople in stores are resorting to manually looking parts up in massive phone book sized catalogs because it's easier than using the computer systems.  Having spent 2 days hearing how much time is spent manually looking things up and performing duplicate data entry she now has a much clearer perspective on how she can better create tools to help the sales team serve the customers.

#### Takeaways

- The Data Hub team used white space deploys to test their new build and deployment processes.  What things can we be doing as an engineering team to move towards the cloud right now?  
- We need to create the psychological safety it requires to learn and grow on our teams.  How can we be gracious with the changes it takes to make a meaningful difference?  Believe that everyone involved did the best that they could.
- How can we better understand the customer?  It took Maxine hearing about a full customer case study about Tomas to understand how he leverages their services and where they fall short as well as a weekend training session at one of their stores to understand the most pressing issues.
- What can we do to make sure that our solution doesn't get so filtered that it's no longer helpful?  If we're only solving a small part of a problem are we really moving the needle in a meaningful manner?